# Estimation of Age Dependent Extinction using Neural Networks (ADE-NN)

***
The ADE-NN model uses deep neural networks to estimate age dependent extinction while accounting for dating uncertainties, incomplete sampling, and while and testing the effects of taxonomic biases. 
The method is described in the [Open Access paper](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/ele.13441): Silvestro et al. A 450 million years long latitudinal gradient in age-dependent extinction. 

***


**NOTE**
The original code was written using the Python library Tensorflow version 1 and is still available in the directory: 'v.1.', but will no longer be updated. **The current version is based on Tensorflow v.2 and relies on the program *ruNNer*, which is available [here](https://github.com/dsilvestro/ruNNer/).**  Like PyRate v.3, ADE-NN requires Python v.3.


## Input data
The input data should be formatted as a text file with tab-separated columns (see directory: Example_data). Tables contain four columns following the format of standard PyRate input files (see [example](https://github.com/dsilvestro/PyRate/blob/master/tutorials/pyrate_tutorial_1.md#generate-pyrate-input-file-option-2)). **Note that the ADE-NN method as been only trained and tested on extinct species.** Extant species can be dropped from the dataset using the `-time_slice` option (see below).

The full datasets analyzed in the original paper are available in this [Zenodo repository](https://zenodo.org/record/3537888#.XiWoXC2ZN24).
**NOTE** 
The method has been tested only on datasets of extinct species and currently does not explicitly account for extant species.

## Implementation - v.2
The ADE-NN v.2 model is implemented in the program `ADE-NN-tf2.py` and relies on the program [ruNNEr](https://github.com/dsilvestro/ruNNer/) to perform the classification of empirical data sets into five categories of age-dependent extinction. Following the terminology used [here](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/ele.13441), the classes are labeled as:

* strongD: strongly decreasing extinction
* mildD: weakly decreasing extinction
* Const: roughly constant extinction rates
* mildI: weakly increasing extinction
* strongI: strongly increasing extinction

These labels appear in the output files generated by the program. To run an analysis you will need to specify at minimum three arguments: 1) the full path to the ruNNer program, 2) the full path to the input data file(s), 3) the Full path of the [pre-trained ADE-NN model](https://github.com/dsilvestro/PyRate/tree/master/ADE-NN/v.2/pretrainedADENN.model). 

To launch the ADE-NN analyses on the test empirical data you can use:
```
python3 ADE-NN2.py -r .../ruNNer-master/ -d .../PyRate-master/ADE-NN/Example_data/ -m .../PyRate-master/ADE-NN/v.2/pretrainedADENN.model
```

You can additionally specify the number of replicates for the analysis, where each replicate generates a random sample of the estimated preservation rates before running the classification; e.g. `-q_samples 1000` runs 1,000 replicates). 
You can also specify a fraction of simulated taxon bias, which randomly re-assigns the labels of a proportion of species with one or few occurrences  (as explained in the [paper](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/ele.13441)); e.g. `-tax_bias 0.2` simulates a taxon bias affecting 20% of the species. Finally, you can restrict the analysis to a defined time slice using the command `-time_slice`. For instance using `-time_slice 380 300` will drop all taxa with occurrences outside of this temporal range and restrict the analysis to those with all occurrences within the range.

The results of the analysis will be saved in a folder named 'results-ADE-NN' in the same directory as the input files. 



## Implementation - v.1
The ADE-NN v.1 model is implemented in the program `ADE-NN.py`. A pre-trained neural network is available as `pretrainedADENN` and includes 3 hidden layers. The empirical datasets analyzed here are available in the directory `occurrence_data`. To launch the ADE-NN analyses on the empirical data and reproduce the results shown in Table S4 you can use the following command:

```
python3 ADE-NN.py -layers 2 -loadNN pretrainedADENN -seed 1234 -data_dir full_path/lat_zones
```

where `-layers 2` specifies that 2 additional hidden layers should be used after the first default hidden layer and `-data_dir` specifies the directory with all input files. Using the seed `1234` ensures that the results match exactly those shown in Table S4 (but different seeds are not expected to significantly alter the results).

To run the analyses while accounting for potential taxonomic inflation you can use the following command:

```
python3 ADE-NN.py -layers 2 -loadNN pretrainedADENN -seed 1234 -data_dir full_path/lat_zones -tax_bias 0.2
```

where `-tax_bias 0.2` sets the taxonomic bias to 20%. These settings generate the results shown in Table S6. Setting `-tax_bias` to 0.1 and 0.3 will reproduce the results shown in Tables S5 and S7, respectively. 


#### Requirements
Running the ADE-NN v.1 program **requires Python v.3** and the following libraries: 

numpy==1.16.3  
scipy==1.2.1   
keras=2.2.4   
sklearn==0.20.3   
tensorflow==1.13.1   
matplotlib==3.0.3  





